
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Northern Fur Seal Movement, Dive Behavior, and Oceanography in the Bering Sea and Pacific Ocean

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

![](https://images.phylopic.org/images/6f7f22fc-30a8-44a1-8f8e-1bbef48a2463/thumbnail/192x192.png)
![](https://images.phylopic.org/images/7ce9ff63-7eec-4fc3-8f37-5f66f9b924a9/thumbnail/192x192.png)

## Project Summary

In 2018, the AFSC Polar Ecosystems Program and Wildlife Computers began
collaboration on a project to develop a new family of SPLASH bio-loggers
that would provide a small footprint device capable of FastLoc GPS,
ocean temperature profiles, and on-board dive behavior summaries that
provide unbiased data and efficient transmission via Argos. Due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, the intended deployments on ribbon and spotted seals
in 2020 were not possible, and in the spring of 2022, only 2 of the 25
devices available were deployed. Instead of letting these devices sit on
the shelf for 2+ years, we have developed a plan to deploy a portion of
them on northern fur seals at San Miguel Island and northern fur seals
at St. Paul Island. At least 10 devices will be reserved for future
deployments on ice seals via collaborative research with Alaska Native
communities. These tags were originally funded by the US Navy in 2017.

These tags employ two key enhancements that have not been previously
available:

1.  Improved ocean temperature profile capabilities with a dedicated
    external thermistor probe
2.  On-board processing of time-at-depth data to create a more efficient
    dive behavior summary message that relies on empirical cumulative
    distributions instead of the typical histogram bin approach used for
    decades.

Because relatively few devices with these new capabilities have been
deployed (by MML or other researchers), there is a great need to observe
how these new devices perform, to evaluate how efficient the data
transmissions are, and to learn from real-world experience so future
deployments can be optimized for a range of study questions.

Visit the [complete briefing paper and
proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1r6L96TEKnydh5dIKPUpB1UwtHEVkACViUd1oD2_1e80/edit?usp=sharing)
for additional details

## Deployment Details

In September 2022, SPLASH bio-loggers were deployed on 12 adult female
northern fur seals at San Miguel Island, California (n=6) and St. Paul
Island, Alaska (n=6).

[This Google
Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1geSmkVzPK_nOkR-bdO5WpM0qHo8Xsw0poYWOz-k2trk/edit?usp=sharing)
lists deployment and animal details.

## Preliminary Information

Preliminary analysis and visualizations are available via the [project
webpage](https://nmml.github.io/nfs-berpac/). The information on this
page is automatically updated every hour and without any significant
quality checks. Errors may be present and are likely. We are providing
access to the information in a public forum in the spirit of open
science and to provide easy access to updated information for the
authors and interested researchers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Disclaimer

<sub>The scientific results and conclusions, as well as any views or
opinions expressed herein, are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of NOAA or the Department of
Commerce.</sub>

<sub> This repository is a scientific product and is not official
communication of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or
the United States Department of Commerce. All NOAA GitHub project code
is provided on an ‘as is’ basis and the user assumes responsibility for
its use. Any claims against the Department of Commerce or Department of
Commerce bureaus stemming from the use of this GitHub project will be
governed by all applicable Federal law. Any reference to specific
commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark,
manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply their
endorsement, recommendation or favoring by the Department of Commerce.
The Department of Commerce seal and logo, or the seal and logo of a DOC
bureau, shall not be used in any manner to imply endorsement of any
commercial product or activity by DOC or the United States Government.
</sub>
